Instructor: A. J. Medford

Email: [ajm@gatech.edu](mailto:ajm@gatech.edu)

Office Hours: [By Appointment](https://app.acuityscheduling.com/schedule.php?owner=18040156&appointmentType=11047919)

Class Hours: W 10:10-11:00am

Office Hours Location: ES&T L1222

Class Room: MoSE 1201A

Course Description
==================

About VIP
---------

The Vertically-Integrated Projects (VIP) Program operates in a research
and development context. Undergraduate students that join VIP teams earn
academic credit for their participation in design/discovery efforts that
assist faculty and graduate students with research and development
issues in their areas of expertise.

The teams are:

-   Multidisciplinary - drawing students from all disciplines on campus;

-   Vertically-integrated - maintaining a mix of sophomores through PhD
    students each semester;

-   Long-term - each undergraduate student may participate in a project
    for up to three years and each graduate student may participate for
    the duration of their graduate career.

The continuity, technical depth, and disciplinary breadth of these teams
are intended to: Provide the time and context necessary for students to
learn and practice many different professional skills, make substantial
technical contributions to the project, and experience many different
roles on a large, multidisciplinary design/discovery team. Support
long-term interaction between the graduate and undergraduate students on
the team. The graduate students mentor the undergraduates as they work
on the design/discovery projects embedded in the graduate students’
research. Enable the completion of large-scale design/discovery projects
that are of significant benefit to faculty members’ research programs.

About Big Data and Quantum Mechanics
------------------------------------

This course explores projects at the intersection of computational
chemistry (quantum mechanics) and data science (big data) within the
application domain of surface science and catalysis. The team merges
expertise from computational and physical sciences, and students from
computer science, electrical engineering, industrial & systems
engineering, chemical engineering, chemistry, physics, and materials
science. The VIP course consists of 3 classes of sub-team projects:

-   Training: All new students must complete a “training” project that
    involves the calculation of an adsorption energy using the
    quantum-mechanical technique of density functional theory (DFT), and
    training of a neural network model that can reproduce DFT results.
    The codes for DFT are well-established, but require the use of
    supercomputing resources and must be converged with respect to
    several numerical parameters. The training exercise will introduce
    students to high-performance computing, quantum-mechanical
    simulations, and machine learning packages used for atomic
    simulation data.

-   Data Generation: These projects will utilize DFT calculations
    performed on the PACE supercomputer to generate datasets of
    scientific relevance for problems in surface science and catalysis.
    This may involve the identification of new catalyst materials via
    high-throughput screening, or gaining an in-depth understanding of
    the catalytic behavior of a material based on modeling of various
    intermediate species and reaction pathways. Projects may also
    involve improving the codes used to generate the DFT data, or the
    infrastructure used to collect and organize the resulting data.

-   Machine Learning: These projects will focus on training
    machine-learning models to reproduce the output of DFT calculations.
    In particular, “neural network force-fields” provide a route to
    rapidly predict the energies and forces on atoms based on training
    data gathered from DFT or other atomistic simulation techniques.
    There are established packages like the Atomistic Machine-learning
    Package (AMP) and the Simple-NN package where these models
    are implemented. However, optimizing the architecture and parameters
    of the neural network remains challenging. These projects will work
    with specific datasets and students will try to improve the
    performance of the machine-learning model by
    varying hyper-parameters. Students may also explore new
    machine-learning algorithms and/or improve the codes and
    infrastructure used for neural network training.

Course Logistics
================

The course will utilize the following resources for communication and
submission of assignments:

-   Github: All course materials will be posted to Github.

-   Canvas: The course Canvas site will be used for submission of
    assignments and peer grading.

-   Slack: The group Slack channel is the preferred method of
    communication with instructors and graduate students. You are
    responsible for anything that is announced in the `vip`
    Slack channel.

Course Objectives {#course-objectives .unnumbered}
=================

1.  Calculate adsorption energies using the density functional
    theory (DFT)

2.  Converge numerical calculations with respect to input parameters

3.  Submit, manage, and analyze high-performance computing jobs

4.  Utilize machine-learning packages to predict the output of atomistic
    simulations

5.  Work with a team to solve real-world problems at the intersection of
    big data and quantum mechanical simulations

Course Structure
================

The grade will be assigned based on three categories:

-   Documentation: 33.3 %

-   Personal Accomplishments: 33.4 %

-   Teamwork and Interactions: 33.3 %

A grade of 0-5 will be assigned for each category based on the criteria
outlined below. A total grade will be computed based on the weighted
average of the 3 categories which will be converted to letter grades
using the following:

-   A: > 4

-   B: > 3

-   C: < 3

-   D: < 2

You will receive a grade at the midterm and after the end of the course.
The midterm grade is only advisory, and will not factor into the final
calculation.

Documentation
-------------

The documentation grade will be assessed based on the VIP notebook and
additional documentation in the Github repository. **All external
documentation should be referenced in the VIP notebook.** Please clearly
mark any external sources by boxing them and highlighting, and/or
placing them on a separate page. If you prefer to use an electronic
notebook or digital tool for documentation it must be approved
beforehand. There is a notebook grading rubric available on the course
Canvas site that will be used to grade the notebooks. The notebook will
account for a total of 3/5 points toward your documentation grade.

The documentation grade will also include contributions from two
additional sources: the in-class updates and a literature review
assignment. The slides from all in-class updates should be uploaded at
the midterm and final. The literature review will be submitted to
Canvas. The in-class updates and literature review will be worth 1 point
each, and account for a significant portion of your final grade, so you
should be diligent about ensuring they are submitted on time.

Personal Accomplishments
------------------------

Personal accomplishments will be measured by self-defined goals and a
combination of instructor and peer evaluation. Within the **first week**
of the semester students returning to projects will define midterm and
semester goals for their project. Each goal should have a deliverable
that can be unambiguously evaluated as complete or incomplete (computer
code, report, figure, etc.), and each student should submit a
deliverable. Deliverables submitted by team members need not be unique,
but ideally self-defined goals will be individualized, such that each
team member has different deliverables that support a larger team-based
goal.

-   5: Goals are completely achieved and additional progress has been
    made (A+)

-   4: Goals are completely achieved (A)

-   3: Goals are partially achieved (B)

-   2: Some progress has been made, but goals are not achieved (C)

-   1: No substantial progress is made towards goals (D)

The accomplishments will be graded by your peers, and confirmed by the
instructor. Importantly, the midterm assessment is only advisory, and
students have an opportunity to **revise goals within 1 week of
receiving the midterm assessment** (revisions must also be approved).
The final grade will depend only on the revised goals. This means that
the grade is controlled by two factors: i) ability to plan research and
set realistic targets and ii) ability to achieve goals and deliver on a
plan.

#### New projects:

For new projects (including the training project for new students) the
instructor or sub-team advisor will provide the initial goals. The
training project goals are based on results from prior semesters and are
known to be reasonable; therefore, goals cannot be removed or revised to
be less challenging. However, new project goals may be overambitious and
students are encouraged to revise them at the midterm once they have a
grasp of the long-term goals and scope of the project.

#### Submission and peer review:

The accomplishments will be initially graded by multiple peers and
confirmed by the instructor. The deliverables will be submitted via
Canvas as a .zip file, and a copy of the project goals document should
be included with the submission to aid the reviewers. If a template is
provided this should be strictly followed to aid in analysis of results.
Any external deliverables (e.g. websites, Github, etc.) should be
clearly referenced. This can also contain any comments, instructions, or
context that may be important for a grader. When grading other students’
assignments you should use the above 1-5 scale and criteria as a
guideline. Only materials included in or referenced in the submission
should be used to assess the criteria (e.g. if a group presents
something in the VIP meeting but does not include it in the submission
then it does not count).

Teamwork and Interaction
------------------------

Teamwork and interaction will be graded based on peer evaluations

conducted through the VIP website.

conducted through the VIP website and your participation in peer grading.
Failure to complete peer grading or peer evals will result in 1 (out of 5) 
points deducted from the Teamwork and Interaction grade. If you do not
complete either then you will lose 2 (out of 5) points.

Note that you **only need to complete peer evals for your sub-team members**,
but peer grading will be across different subteams and will be explicitly
assigned.


Meeting Format
--------------

The first weeks will involve an overview of the team, available
projects, and discussion of goals. Subsequent weeks will include
training lectures by graduate students, and/or 10 minute update
presentations by VIP sub-teams. The goal of these presentations is to
present progress and challenges so that the rest of the class can make
suggestions. Updates should be informal and consist of 5 or fewer
slides. The remaining time in the class will be used as a “workshop”
where teams can interact with their sub-team advisor and/or each other
as needed. **If nobody from your group is present when you are scheduled
to present then everyone in the group will lose 1/2 point (out of 5
total) from your “Documentation” grade**. Please let an instructor know
if nobody can make it, and work with other groups to find a time to make
up the presentation.

Schedule 
========

Week 1: Introduction to VIP and projects (Medford)

Week 2: Overview of literature searches (Medford)

Week 3: Intro to Python (Lei)

Week 4: Intro to ASE and adsorption energies (Comer)

Week 5: PACE and Bash scripting (Lei)

Week 6: Density functional theory calculations (Comer)

Week 7: Workshop

Week 8: Midterm Updates: Training Groups

Week 9: Midterm Updates: Machine Learning Groups

Week 10: Atomistic machine learning: theory (Lei)

Week 11: Atomistic machine learning: application (Comer)

Week 12: Workshop

Week 13: Final Updates: Traning Groups

Week 14: Final Updates: Machine Learning Groups


Changes to Syllabus
===================

The schedule and syllabus are subject to change. Given that this is a
research course, changes are to be expected; however, we will do our
best to notify you of any changes and implement them as fairly as
possible.
